.TH TOKE 1 "2026-04-19" "toke 0.1.0" "toke Manual"
.SH NAME
toke \- compile toke source files to native binaries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B toke
.RI [ flags ]
.I source\-file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B toke
(also available as
.BR tkc )
is the reference compiler for the toke programming language, a statically
typed, compiled language designed for LLM code generation.  It reads a
single
.I .tk
source file, type-checks it, and either compiles it to a native binary
via LLVM, emits LLVM IR, or performs one of several auxiliary operations
(formatting, checking, migration, compression).
.PP
The default syntax uses a 56-character set with 12 keywords.  Legacy
80-character syntax is available via
.BR \-\-legacy .
.SH FLAGS
.SS "Compilation"
.TP
.BI \-\-target\  triple
LLVM target triple (default: host native).
.TP
.BI \-\-out\  path
Output binary path.  Defaults to the source file stem (e.g.,
.I main.tk
produces
.IR main ).
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-interface
Also emit a
.I .tki
interface file (JSON) alongside the output.
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-llvm
Emit LLVM IR
.RI ( .ll )
to the output path instead of compiling to a binary.
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-asm
Emit assembly
.RI ( .s )
instead of compiling to a binary.
.TP
.BR \-O0 ", " \-O1 ", " \-O2 ", " \-O3
Optimisation level (default:
.BR \-O1 ).
.SS "Analysis"
.TP
.B \-\-check
Type-check only; no code generation.  Exits 0 if the source is valid.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast
Dump the parsed AST as JSON to stdout and exit.
.SS "Formatting"
.TP
.B \-\-fmt
Format source to canonical compact form and print to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-pretty
Pretty-print with whitespace for human readability.
.TP
.B \-\-expand
Expand abbreviated identifiers as inline comments.
.TP
.B \-\-sourcemap
Emit a
.I .map
source map alongside
.B \-\-fmt
or
.B \-\-pretty
output.
.SS "Companion files"
.TP
.B \-\-companion
Generate a
.I .tkc.md
companion file skeleton to stdout.
.TP
.BI \-\-companion\-out\  path
Write companion file to
.I path
instead of stdout.
.TP
.BI \-\-verify\-companion\  file
Verify companion file hash against source.
.TP
.BI \-\-companion\-diff\  file
Compare source against companion, report divergences.
.SS "Compression"
.TP
.B \-\-compress
Compress text from stdin to reduced-token form (stdout).
.TP
.B \-\-decompress
Decompress text from stdin back to original form (stdout).
.TP
.B \-\-compress\-stream
Stream-compress stdin line-by-line, emitting chunks.
.SS "Migration"
.TP
.B \-\-migrate
Migrate a legacy
.I .tk
file to default syntax (stdout).
.SS "Syntax mode"
.TP
.B \-\-legacy
Use legacy mode (80-character set, uppercase type identifiers).
.TP
.B \-\-profile1
Deprecated alias for
.BR \-\-legacy .
.TP
.B \-\-profile2
Deprecated alias for default mode (no-op).
.SS "Diagnostics"
.TP
.B \-\-diag\-json
Emit diagnostics as JSON (default when stdout is not a terminal).
.TP
.B \-\-diag\-text
Emit diagnostics as human-readable text (default when stdout is a terminal).
.TP
.B \-\-diag\-sarif
Emit diagnostics as SARIF v2.1.0 JSON to stdout.
.SS "Limit overrides"
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-funcs= N
Maximum function signatures (default: 128).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-locals= N
Maximum locals per function (default: 128).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-params= N
Maximum params per function or fields per struct (default: 16).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-structs= N
Maximum struct type definitions (default: 64).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-imports= N
Maximum import alias mappings (default: 32).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-in\-flight= N
Maximum concurrent imports in flight (default: 64).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-avail= N
Maximum available modules in directory (default: 256).
.TP
.BI \-\-arena\-block= N
Arena block size in bytes (default: 65536).
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-iters= N
Maximum loop iterations at runtime (default: 0 = unlimited).
.TP
.B \-\-show\-limits
Print effective limits and exit.
.SS "Configuration"
.TP
.BI \-\-config= PATH
Load configuration from
.IR PATH .
Default:
.IR ./tkc.toml .
.SS "Informational"
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage summary and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TK_LOG_LEVEL
Set the logging verbosity for the runtime.  Values: 0 (off), 1 (error),
2 (warn), 3 (info), 4 (debug).  Default: 1.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 64
Usage error: bad command-line arguments, missing source file, or invalid
option combination.
.TP
.B 65
Compilation error: lexer, parser, or type-checker reported one or more
diagnostics.
.TP
.B 70
Internal error: out of memory, LLVM failure, or linker failure.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compile a source file to a native binary:
.PP
.RS
.B toke main.tk
.RE
.PP
Type-check without compiling:
.PP
.RS
.B toke \-\-check main.tk
.RE
.PP
Emit LLVM IR:
.PP
.RS
.B toke \-\-emit\-llvm \-\-out main.ll main.tk
.RE
.PP
Format source to canonical form:
.PP
.RS
.B toke \-\-fmt main.tk
.RE
.PP
Migrate legacy syntax to default:
.PP
.RS
.B toke \-\-migrate old.tk > new.tk
.RE
.PP
Compile with a specific output name and optimisation level:
.PP
.RS
.B toke \-O2 \-\-out myapp main.tk
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clang (1),
.BR llc (1)
.PP
Project homepage:
.UR https://tokelang.dev
.UE
.br
Source code:
.UR https://github.com/karwalski/toke
.UE
.SH AUTHORS
Matthew Watt
.UR https://github.com/karwalski
.UE
